.Dd July 18, 2026
.Dt VP 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vp
.Nd view image files
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl fhkKlvz
.Op Fl s Ar seconds
.Op Fl r Ar resolution
.Op Ar file-or-url ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
View Picture
.Ar files
using SDL2. Supported file types include jpeg, gif, png, bmp, ppm, xpm, pcx,
tga, and anything else your install of SDL2_image supports. Keyboard controls
are escape, q, or x to quit, f to toggle fullscreen, z to toggle scale-to-fit,
left arrow to go to the previous image, right arrow to go to the next image,
enter to redisplay the current image and stop slideshow, and space to toggle
slideshow. n toggles
the on-screen display of the current file name, and N (shift-n) cycles its
position through the corners, edge centers, and screen center. The view can
be zoomed with + and - (or the keypad equivalents), or in larger steps with
page up and page down; = returns to 1:1, and shifted arrow keys pan a zoomed
image. The mouse also controls the view: dragging with the left button pans,
the scroll wheel zooms at the pointer, and dragging the middle button up or
down zooms in or out (holding the left and right buttons together works as
the middle button). Zooming, panning, or toggling fullscreen disables
slideshow mode. File names starting
with http:// or https:// are interpreted as URL's and downloaded; HTTP
redirects are followed, up to five hops. Both IPv4 and IPv6 are supported;
a literal IPv6 address in a URL is written in brackets, as in
http://[::1]:8080/image.png. https support requires
.Nm
to have been built with OpenSSL, in which case server certificates are
verified against the system trust store unless
.Fl k
is given; in a build without it, an https:// URL or a redirect to one is
reported as unsupported and skipped.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl f , -fullscreen
Start in fullscreen mode
.It Fl h , -help
Show the help screen
.It Fl k , -insecure
Accept https server certificates that fail verification (self-signed,
expired, wrong hostname). The failure reason is still printed as a warning.
Only meaningful when
.Nm
was built with OpenSSL.
.It Fl K , -keep
Keep downloaded files instead of deleting them on exit. Each kept file's
path is printed at exit, alongside the URL it came from. Without this
flag, files downloaded from URLs are removed when
.Nm
exits, including exits triggered by SIGINT, SIGTERM, or SIGHUP.
.It Fl l , -loud
Loud behavior. Print out file names as it displays
.It Fl s , -sleep
Sleep time between images, in seconds. Fractions are accepted
(2.5 means two and a half seconds); the range is 0.1 to 60.
The default is 2.5 seconds.
.It Fl r , -resolution
Fullscreen display resolution, as <width>x<height>, e.g. 1920x1080.
The closest display mode the hardware offers is selected: a real mode
switch under X11, the KMS/DRM console, and macOS; Wayland compositors
scale instead of switching. Without this flag, fullscreen uses the
desktop resolution. The @<depth> suffix of older releases is gone;
display depth is not a thing SDL2 renderers control.
.It Fl v , -version
Print the version and exit
.It Fl z , -zoom
Scale images to fit the screen (zoom)
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width VP_RENDERER
.It Ev VP_RENDERER
Force the rendering backend, mainly for debugging or testing on machines with
or without 3D acceleration. Accepted values are
.Ar auto
(the default: use hardware acceleration if available, otherwise fall back to
the software renderer),
.Ar accelerated
(or
.Ar hw ;
hardware only, fail if unavailable), and
.Ar software
(or
.Ar sw ) .
With the
.Fl l
flag the selected renderer and whether it is accelerated are printed at
startup.
.El
.\".Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.\"Filenames are sent to stderr.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Erik Greenwald Aq Mt erik@elfga.com
